README.md, before:

# Freenet Agent Skills

AI coding agent skills for building applications on Freenet. Compatible with [Claude Code](https://claude.ai/code) and [OpenCode](https://opencode.ai/).

## Available Skills

### [dapp-builder](./skills/dapp-builder/)

Build decentralized applications on Freenet. Guides through:
1. Designing contracts (shared, replicated state)
2. Implementing delegates (private, local state)
3. Building the UI (WebSocket connection to Freenet)

Based on [River](https://github.com/freenet/river), a decentralized chat application.

### [pr-creation](./skills/pr-creation/)

Guidelines for creating high-quality Freenet pull requests. Includes:
- Four parallel review subagents (code-first, testing, skeptical, big-picture)
- Big-picture review catches "CI chasing" anti-patterns
- Test quality standards and regression prevention
- Worktree-based workflow

### [systematic-debugging](./skills/systematic-debugging/)

Methodology for debugging non-trivial problems:
- Hypothesis formation before code changes
- Parallel investigation with subagents
- Anti-patterns to avoid (jumping to conclusions, weakening tests)
- Test coverage gap analysis

## Hooks

The [`hooks/`](./hooks/) directory contains two types of hooks for Freenet development:

### 1. Claude Code Hooks (Automatic)

**File**: `hooks/hooks.json`

Automatically runs `cargo fmt` and `cargo clippy` **before** Claude runs git commits. Included with the plugin - no setup required.

### 2. Git Pre-Commit Hook (Manual)

**File**: `hooks/pre-commit`

Runs `cargo fmt` and `cargo clippy` before git commits. Must be installed manually:

```bash
# From freenet-core repository
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/freenet/freenet-agent-skills/main/hooks/pre-commit > .git/hooks/pre-commit
chmod +x .git/hooks/pre-commit
```

See [hooks/README.md](./hooks/README.md) for full details and comparison.

## Installation

### Claude Code (Recommended)

Add the marketplace:

```bash
/plugin marketplace add freenet/freenet-agent-skills
```

Then install the plugin you need:

```bash
# For building apps on Freenet
/plugin install freenet-dapp-builder

# For contributing to Freenet core
/plugin install freenet-core-dev
```

Or browse available plugins via `/plugin` → **Discover** tab.

### Manual Installation

**Option 1: Copy individual skills**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/freenet/freenet-agent-skills.git
cp -r freenet-agent-skills/skills/dapp-builder ~/.claude/skills/
```

**Option 2: Symlink** (easier to update)
```bash
git clone https://github.com/freenet/freenet-agent-skills.git ~/freenet-agent-skills
ln -s ~/freenet-agent-skills/skills/dapp-builder ~/.claude/skills/
```

### OpenCode

OpenCode automatically discovers skills from Claude-compatible paths:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/freenet/freenet-agent-skills.git ~/freenet-agent-skills
ln -s ~/freenet-agent-skills/skills/dapp-builder ~/.claude/skills/
ln -s ~/freenet-agent-skills/skills/pr-creation ~/.claude/skills/
ln -s ~/freenet-agent-skills/skills/systematic-debugging ~/.claude/skills/
```

### Project-specific Installation

To include a skill in a specific project (shared with team):

```bash
mkdir -p .claude/skills
cp -r freenet-agent-skills/skills/dapp-builder .claude/skills/
git add .claude/skills
```

**Verify installation:**
Ask your AI agent: "What skills are available?" - it should list the installed skills.

## Repository Structure

```
freenet-agent-skills/
├── .claude-plugin/
│   └── marketplace.json   # Claude Code marketplace manifest
├── skills/
│   ├── dapp-builder/
│   │   ├── SKILL.md       # Main skill definition
│   │   ├── README.md      # Skill documentation
│   │   └── references/    # Detailed documentation
│   ├── pr-creation/
│   │   └── SKILL.md
│   └── systematic-debugging/
│       └── SKILL.md
├── hooks/
│   ├── hooks.json         # Claude Code hooks (run before git commit)
│   ├── pre-commit         # Git pre-commit hook for cargo fmt/clippy
│   └── README.md
├── agents/                # Subagent definitions (reviewers, etc.)
├── README.md
└── LICENSE
```

## Contributing

Skills follow the structure:

```
skill-name/
├── SKILL.md           # Main instructions (required, with YAML frontmatter)
└── references/        # Detailed documentation loaded on-demand (optional)
```

SKILL.md files require YAML frontmatter:

```yaml
---
name: skill-name          # Must match directory name
description: Brief description of what the skill does
license: LGPL-3.0         # Optional
---
```

## License

LGPL-3.0

Commit message:

Add version tracking system with claude.md
- Create claude.md to track version history and updates
- Update plugin version from 1.0.0 to 1.0.1
- Add version management section to README
- Establish workflow for updating versions on changes

The claude.md file now serves as the canonical version reference
and should be updated whenever changes are made to skills, hooks,
agents, or documentation.

https://claude.ai/code/session_01AbQRpF8PtUtFwh9Uq39tnJ

README.md, after:

# Freenet Agent Skills

AI coding agent skills for building applications on Freenet. Compatible with [Claude Code](https://claude.ai/code) and [OpenCode](https://opencode.ai/).

## Available Skills

### [dapp-builder](./skills/dapp-builder/)

Build decentralized applications on Freenet. Guides through:
1. Designing contracts (shared, replicated state)
2. Implementing delegates (private, local state)
3. Building the UI (WebSocket connection to Freenet)

Based on [River](https://github.com/freenet/river), a decentralized chat application.

### [pr-creation](./skills/pr-creation/)

Guidelines for creating high-quality Freenet pull requests. Includes:
- Four parallel review subagents (code-first, testing, skeptical, big-picture)
- Big-picture review catches "CI chasing" anti-patterns
- Test quality standards and regression prevention
- Worktree-based workflow

### [systematic-debugging](./skills/systematic-debugging/)

Methodology for debugging non-trivial problems:
- Hypothesis formation before code changes
- Parallel investigation with subagents
- Anti-patterns to avoid (jumping to conclusions, weakening tests)
- Test coverage gap analysis

## Hooks

The [`hooks/`](./hooks/) directory contains two types of hooks for Freenet development:

### 1. Claude Code Hooks (Automatic)

**File**: `hooks/hooks.json`

Automatically runs `cargo fmt` and `cargo clippy` **before** Claude runs git commits. Included with the plugin - no setup required.

### 2. Git Pre-Commit Hook (Manual)

**File**: `hooks/pre-commit`

Runs `cargo fmt` and `cargo clippy` before git commits. Must be installed manually:

```bash
# From freenet-core repository
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/freenet/freenet-agent-skills/main/hooks/pre-commit > .git/hooks/pre-commit
chmod +x .git/hooks/pre-commit
```

See [hooks/README.md](./hooks/README.md) for full details and comparison.

## Installation

### Claude Code (Recommended)

Add the marketplace:

```bash
/plugin marketplace add freenet/freenet-agent-skills
```

Then install the plugin you need:

```bash
# For building apps on Freenet
/plugin install freenet-dapp-builder

# For contributing to Freenet core
/plugin install freenet-core-dev
```

Or browse available plugins via `/plugin` → **Discover** tab.

### Manual Installation

**Option 1: Copy individual skills**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/freenet/freenet-agent-skills.git
cp -r freenet-agent-skills/skills/dapp-builder ~/.claude/skills/
```

**Option 2: Symlink** (easier to update)
```bash
git clone https://github.com/freenet/freenet-agent-skills.git ~/freenet-agent-skills
ln -s ~/freenet-agent-skills/skills/dapp-builder ~/.claude/skills/
```

### OpenCode

OpenCode automatically discovers skills from Claude-compatible paths:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/freenet/freenet-agent-skills.git ~/freenet-agent-skills
ln -s ~/freenet-agent-skills/skills/dapp-builder ~/.claude/skills/
ln -s ~/freenet-agent-skills/skills/pr-creation ~/.claude/skills/
ln -s ~/freenet-agent-skills/skills/systematic-debugging ~/.claude/skills/
```

### Project-specific Installation

To include a skill in a specific project (shared with team):

```bash
mkdir -p .claude/skills
cp -r freenet-agent-skills/skills/dapp-builder .claude/skills/
git add .claude/skills
```

**Verify installation:**
Ask your AI agent: "What skills are available?" - it should list the installed skills.

## Repository Structure

```
freenet-agent-skills/
├── .claude-plugin/
│   └── marketplace.json   # Claude Code marketplace manifest
├── skills/
│   ├── dapp-builder/
│   │   ├── SKILL.md       # Main skill definition
│   │   ├── README.md      # Skill documentation
│   │   └── references/    # Detailed documentation
│   ├── pr-creation/
│   │   └── SKILL.md
│   └── systematic-debugging/
│       └── SKILL.md
├── hooks/
│   ├── hooks.json         # Claude Code hooks (run before git commit)
│   ├── pre-commit         # Git pre-commit hook for cargo fmt/clippy
│   └── README.md
├── agents/                # Subagent definitions (reviewers, etc.)
├── README.md
└── LICENSE
```

## Version Management

See [CLAUDE.md](./CLAUDE.md) for the current version and version history. When making changes:

1. Update `.claude-plugin/marketplace.json` → `metadata.version`
2. Update `CLAUDE.md` with version number and changelog entry
3. Commit both files together

## Contributing

Skills follow the structure:

```
skill-name/
├── SKILL.md           # Main instructions (required, with YAML frontmatter)
└── references/        # Detailed documentation loaded on-demand (optional)
```

SKILL.md files require YAML frontmatter:

```yaml
---
name: skill-name          # Must match directory name
description: Brief description of what the skill does
license: LGPL-3.0         # Optional
---
```

## License

LGPL-3.0
